TODO.md, before:


# TODO

- [x] Proper support for opam repo management.
- [x] Implement depexts.
- [x] Warn on md5 hashes.
- [x] Refactor builder.nix.
- [x] Refactor overrides.
- [x] Better depexts mapping:
  - https://github.com/tweag/opam-nix/blob/8062dfe742f6636191017232ff504f6765a7f2d1/src/overlays/external/debian.nix#L35
- [x] Filter invalid depexts names.
- [x] Run opam actions natively with Bos.
- [x] Apply "with-test" var when extracting install.
- [x] Use native nixpkgs to build onix itself.
- [x] Use the same compiler for onix and project build.
- [x] Drop fpath, use OpamFilename.´
- [x] Improve logging.
- [x] Properly fix ocaml env var export for deps.
  - Using hooks seems is problematic due to multi-export (fails with "Argument list too long").
  - Computing the dep closure is more deterministic albeit potentially costly.
- [x] Replace build ctx json with OCAMLPATH lookup.
  - [ ] Consider installing the opam file as $libdir/$pkg/onix-opam or even overwritting ./opam.
- [ ] ~~Do we need to include `opam` in build ctx json or can we pass repo-url?~~
  - ~~Do we really want opam files for all deps (for opam's `depends` var)?~~
- [ ] ~~Use builtins.filterSource for ./. src to exclude unwanted dirs (gitignore, _build).~~
- [x] Define build/test/dev dependencies separately in lock file?
- [x] Handle strange version names in nix paths (like dream-pure-1.0.0-alpha2).
  - So we can correctly set up buildInputs/nativeBuildInputs, etc.
- [x] Changing project's opam file currently triggers full scope rebuild?
- [x] Support gitignore.
- api.lock could be a derivation.
- [x] Support dependency flags: with-build with-test with-doc with-dev/with-tools?
  - Expose flags in the api module.
- [x] Pass ignore file as a parameter: --ignore-file=(default=.gitignore).
- [x] Read ONIX_REPO_URL.
- [x] Allow setting dep flags for both the project and the deps. 
- [x] Nix store path parsing does not work for `nix develop`: pass nv to actions.
- [x] Ensure valid pkg names (exclude ~).
- [x] Use two sets for depexts: nix * other instead of nix | other.
- [x] Support zip unpacking (tezos?).
- [x] Use builtins.foldl’.
- [x] Handle .config files (like conf-binutils.config). Is this related to opam's `flag: conf`.
  - https://github.com/tweag/opam-nix/blob/8062dfe742f6636191017232ff504f6765a7f2d1/src/builder.nix#L358
  - Generated on build: https://github.com/ocaml/opam-repository/blob/00777c1a37b2eac5e802e10570a76c89bc5d221e/packages/conf-binutils/conf-binutils.0.3/opam#L9
  - The vars from config files should be loaded into env/vars for a package that depends on the package providing the config file.
  - The `flags: conf` is probably to indicate to opam to load the .config files after build, if any.
  - Could be loaded via OPAM_VAR_xxx with a hook?
  - The .config files also contain additional files, do we really want to copy them?
    - This is because in some cases they will actually resolve to nix paths.
    - [x] An approach alternative to setting OPAM_VAR_xxx is to explicitly lookup vars in Build_context from the saved `onix-propagated-opam-vars` file.
    - [x] Cache the `Dot_config` file as it's likely to be accessed multiple times.
- [x] Use nix-prefetch-url.
- [x] Use nix-prefetch-git for repo fetching.
- [ ] Make sure that incremental/partial changes to the lock file (and opam file) are possible withou full rebuild.
- [x] Make dev tools work: vscode/vim plugins.
- [x] Fix ocaml env vars propagation for shell.
- [ ] ~~Use nix-prefetch-git for pins.~~
- [ ] Remove empty libdir after install (should at least have opam!!)?
  - [ ] Install repo's opam, the monads pkg does not install opam for example.
- [ ] Document that opam vars can be set by defining OPAM_VAR_pkg_name.
- [ ] Consider using opaline.
  - Or we could even intall ourselves with OpamFile.Dot_install.
  - https://docs.ocaml.pro/docs/LIBRARY.opam_format@opam-format.2.0.8/OpamFile/Dot_install/index.html
- [ ] Implement onix shell.
- [ ] Implement onix build.
- [x] Add --lock-file argument to actions.
- [ ] Add a command similar to `opam var` to lookup package variables?
- [ ] Improve error-handling.
- [ ] Build any package without a project `onix build utop` or similar.
- [ ] ~~Make depends/depexts optional fields.~~ No longer needed for new build context.
- [ ] Handle empty lock file.
- [ ] Fetch opam extra-source files.
- [ ] Always patch shebangs?
- [ ] ~~Do we need to pass --ocaml-version? Can we expect OCaml to be always in the path?~~
  - [ ] Pass package nv to opam actions. This will fix the develop $out issue.
- [x] Add an example with overrides.
- [ ] Support static compilation.
- [ ] Handle setenv and build-env.
- [ ] Support cross-compilation.
- [ ] Add flakes support.
- [x] ~~Use strictDeps. This will require handling conf- packages in the lock file.~~
  - Added a build option.
- [ ] Handle lock file without ocaml.
- [ ] Version the lock file.
  - Add version, packages and repo fields.
- [ ] Consider using joinSymlinks to create a build scope.
  - Use this for the `onix build` command, i.e., result will contain the root outputs.
- [x] Consider using makeScope for the scope.
- [ ] Handle pkg:installed?enable:disable.
- [x] Stop using emptyPkg. Override the base compiler only?
- [ ] Would depending on the content of the opam files (as opposed to the opam file in the repo) improve cache reusability?
- [ ] Handle enable-ocaml-beta-repository.
- [ ] Should we include the opam field in the lock pkg? The opam file path can be reconstructed from the repo path and pkg nv.
- [x] Hanlde "sys-ocaml-version" var.
- [ ] Group dep flags.
- [ ] Setup the opamverse test.
- [ ] notty: seems to have a missing propagated build dep.
- [ ] When adding nativeBuildInouts we need to include all transitive deps.
- [ ] Run commands with shell?
  - https://github.com/ocaml/opam-repository/blob/a6d8661d6cb4dcb9017dea68bad0f5b2dedb2f09/packages/bap-llvm/bap-llvm.2.4.0/opam#L11
- [ ] Filter out invalid nixpkgs names: "pkgs.devel/librdkafka"
- [ ] Slacko base-no-ppx for lwt?
- [ ] Support a vendoring/forking workflow (override src?).
- [ ] Opam-installer requires ocaml 4.13 by default. Use the same version as the rest of the build.
- [ ] Document diffs:
  - Support compiler option packages.
  - Support dev tools, test, doc.
  - Support pins.
  - Support cross.
  - Support lock-file.
  - Support easy building of any package without nix lock.
  - Support offline mode.
- [ ] Help debug nix paths (eg show opam repo path)
- [x] When the scope is built but there was a pkg override do we still build the pkg? Must not.
- [x] Replace hardcoded ocaml nix versions with a call to get currently available version from ocaml-ng.
- [ ] Make sure that unsupported compiler combinations error out.
  - compiler: base|system, options package (warn on pkg with compiler flag?)
  - compiler: variants, no valid version in nix
- [ ] Add self pkg to OPAMPATH[0]
- [ ] Use rec in lock.
- [x] Do not include opt deps in lock.

Commit message:

Support opam/pkg.opam file lookup for pins.
Still missing correct lock file generation.

TODO.md, after:


# TODO

- [x] Proper support for opam repo management.
- [x] Implement depexts.
- [x] Warn on md5 hashes.
- [x] Refactor builder.nix.
- [x] Refactor overrides.
- [x] Better depexts mapping:
  - https://github.com/tweag/opam-nix/blob/8062dfe742f6636191017232ff504f6765a7f2d1/src/overlays/external/debian.nix#L35
- [x] Filter invalid depexts names.
- [x] Run opam actions natively with Bos.
- [x] Apply "with-test" var when extracting install.
- [x] Use native nixpkgs to build onix itself.
- [x] Use the same compiler for onix and project build.
- [x] Drop fpath, use OpamFilename.´
- [x] Improve logging.
- [x] Properly fix ocaml env var export for deps.
  - Using hooks seems is problematic due to multi-export (fails with "Argument list too long").
  - Computing the dep closure is more deterministic albeit potentially costly.
- [x] Replace build ctx json with OCAMLPATH lookup.
  - [ ] Consider installing the opam file as $libdir/$pkg/onix-opam or even overwritting ./opam.
- [ ] ~~Do we need to include `opam` in build ctx json or can we pass repo-url?~~
  - ~~Do we really want opam files for all deps (for opam's `depends` var)?~~
- [ ] ~~Use builtins.filterSource for ./. src to exclude unwanted dirs (gitignore, _build).~~
- [x] Define build/test/dev dependencies separately in lock file?
- [x] Handle strange version names in nix paths (like dream-pure-1.0.0-alpha2).
  - So we can correctly set up buildInputs/nativeBuildInputs, etc.
- [x] Changing project's opam file currently triggers full scope rebuild?
- [x] Support gitignore.
- api.lock could be a derivation.
- [x] Support dependency flags: with-build with-test with-doc with-dev/with-tools?
  - Expose flags in the api module.
- [x] Pass ignore file as a parameter: --ignore-file=(default=.gitignore).
- [x] Read ONIX_REPO_URL.
- [x] Allow setting dep flags for both the project and the deps. 
- [x] Nix store path parsing does not work for `nix develop`: pass nv to actions.
- [x] Ensure valid pkg names (exclude ~).
- [x] Use two sets for depexts: nix * other instead of nix | other.
- [x] Support zip unpacking (tezos?).
- [x] Use builtins.foldl’.
- [x] Handle .config files (like conf-binutils.config). Is this related to opam's `flag: conf`.
  - https://github.com/tweag/opam-nix/blob/8062dfe742f6636191017232ff504f6765a7f2d1/src/builder.nix#L358
  - Generated on build: https://github.com/ocaml/opam-repository/blob/00777c1a37b2eac5e802e10570a76c89bc5d221e/packages/conf-binutils/conf-binutils.0.3/opam#L9
  - The vars from config files should be loaded into env/vars for a package that depends on the package providing the config file.
  - The `flags: conf` is probably to indicate to opam to load the .config files after build, if any.
  - Could be loaded via OPAM_VAR_xxx with a hook?
  - The .config files also contain additional files, do we really want to copy them?
    - This is because in some cases they will actually resolve to nix paths.
    - [x] An approach alternative to setting OPAM_VAR_xxx is to explicitly lookup vars in Build_context from the saved `onix-propagated-opam-vars` file.
    - [x] Cache the `Dot_config` file as it's likely to be accessed multiple times.
- [x] Use nix-prefetch-url.
- [x] Use nix-prefetch-git for repo fetching.
- [ ] Make sure that incremental/partial changes to the lock file (and opam file) are possible withou full rebuild.
- [x] Make dev tools work: vscode/vim plugins.
- [x] Fix ocaml env vars propagation for shell.
- [ ] ~~Use nix-prefetch-git for pins.~~
- [ ] Remove empty libdir after install (should at least have opam!!)?
  - [ ] Install repo's opam, the monads pkg does not install opam for example.
- [ ] Document that opam vars can be set by defining OPAM_VAR_pkg_name.
- [ ] Consider using opaline.
  - Or we could even intall ourselves with OpamFile.Dot_install.
  - https://docs.ocaml.pro/docs/LIBRARY.opam_format@opam-format.2.0.8/OpamFile/Dot_install/index.html
- [ ] Implement onix shell.
- [ ] Implement onix build.
- [x] Add --lock-file argument to actions.
- [ ] Add a command similar to `opam var` to lookup package variables?
- [ ] Improve error-handling.
- [ ] Build any package without a project `onix build utop` or similar.
- [ ] ~~Make depends/depexts optional fields.~~ No longer needed for new build context.
- [ ] Handle empty lock file.
- [ ] Fetch opam extra-source files.
- [ ] Always patch shebangs?
- [ ] ~~Do we need to pass --ocaml-version? Can we expect OCaml to be always in the path?~~
  - [ ] Pass package nv to opam actions. This will fix the develop $out issue.
- [x] Add an example with overrides.
- [ ] Support static compilation.
- [ ] Handle setenv and build-env.
- [ ] Support cross-compilation.
- [ ] Add flakes support.
- [x] ~~Use strictDeps. This will require handling conf- packages in the lock file.~~
  - Added a build option.
- [ ] Handle lock file without ocaml.
- [ ] Version the lock file.
  - Add version, packages and repo fields.
- [ ] Consider using joinSymlinks to create a build scope.
  - Use this for the `onix build` command, i.e., result will contain the root outputs.
- [x] Consider using makeScope for the scope.
- [ ] Handle pkg:installed?enable:disable.
- [x] Stop using emptyPkg. Override the base compiler only?
- [ ] Would depending on the content of the opam files (as opposed to the opam file in the repo) improve cache reusability?
- [ ] Handle enable-ocaml-beta-repository.
- [ ] Should we include the opam field in the lock pkg? The opam file path can be reconstructed from the repo path and pkg nv.
- [x] Hanlde "sys-ocaml-version" var.
- [ ] Group dep flags.
- [ ] Setup the opamverse test.
- [ ] notty: seems to have a missing propagated build dep.
- [ ] When adding nativeBuildInouts we need to include all transitive deps.
- [ ] Run commands with shell?
  - https://github.com/ocaml/opam-repository/blob/a6d8661d6cb4dcb9017dea68bad0f5b2dedb2f09/packages/bap-llvm/bap-llvm.2.4.0/opam#L11
- [ ] Filter out invalid nixpkgs names: "pkgs.devel/librdkafka"
- [ ] Slacko base-no-ppx for lwt?
- [ ] Support a vendoring/forking workflow (override src?).
- [ ] Opam-installer requires ocaml 4.13 by default. Use the same version as the rest of the build.
- [ ] Consider adding opam-installer to lock file to avoid pulling pkgs.opam-installer.
- [ ] Document diffs:
  - Support compiler option packages.
  - Support dev tools, test, doc.
  - Support pins.
  - Support cross.
  - Support lock-file.
  - Support easy building of any package without nix lock.
  - Support offline mode.
- [ ] Help debug nix paths (eg show opam repo path)
- [x] When the scope is built but there was a pkg override do we still build the pkg? Must not.
- [x] Replace hardcoded ocaml nix versions with a call to get currently available version from ocaml-ng.
- [ ] Make sure that unsupported compiler combinations error out.
  - compiler: base|system, options package (warn on pkg with compiler flag?)
  - compiler: variants, no valid version in nix
- [ ] Add self pkg to OPAMPATH[0]
- [x] Use rec in lock.
- [x] Do not include opt deps in lock.
- [ ] Include expanded patch/build/install commands in lock file.
  - This is not easy because substs need to happen during patch phase, which requires var lookup.
